In the previous lecture, we looked at transforming
spatial velocity from one coordinate frame
to another. We did this for the two-dimensional
case and we learned that the relationship
between velocities is given by a Jacobian
matrix which is actually a function of the
relative orientation between the two coordinate
frames.
For three dimensions, things are actually
quite similar. So, here is a three-dimensional
reference coordinate frame, a point which
has a spatial velocity with respect to Frame
A. And, here is Frame B and we can describe
the relative pose between Frame A and Frame
B. We can show in red the spatial velocity
with respect to Frame B and the relationship
between the two is given by a Jacobian matrix.
For the three-dimensional case, the Jacobian
matrix is 6 x 6. And, once again, it is a
function only of the relative orientation
between the two coordinate frames. It’s
a function of rotation matrix from Frame B
to Frame A.
Here is an example of an industrial robot.
And, if I apply a particular set of robot
joint angle velocities, I obtain a particular
spatial velocity for the robot end effector
and those two quantities are related by the
manipulator, Jacobian.
Now, this assumes that the robot end effector
velocity is defined with respect to the world
coordinate frame, denoted zero here. It’s
often very useful to describe the velocity
of the end effector with respect to the end
effector’s coordinate frame. I have denoted
here as Frame 6.
Now, we can write this in terms of a different
Jacobian matrix. This Jacobian matrix relates
the robot joint angle velocity to the robot
end effector velocity expressed in terms of
Frame 6.
We can write an expression for the end effector’s
spatial velocity with respect to Frame 6 in
terms of two Jacobian matrices. This Jacobian
is the standard robot manipulator Jacobian
matrix that we have talked about previously.
And, this Jacobian matrix is responsible for
transforming velocity from Frame 0 to Frame
6 and it is a function of the relative pose
from Frame 6 to Frame 0. And, that Jacobian
matrix, as we introduced in the previous slide,
is a function simply of the rotational part
of the relative pose.